ecuring national business competitive power – is the problem which both business representatives and government authorities are in search of the solution to. irst and foremost companies tend to consolidate their positions and secure competitive edges of their products and their concrete enterprise. owever in case of potential or real threat to their completive ability concerns the interests of the whole branch, the companies often pass to industry-wide level and work out corporate actions in order to consolidate the positions of the whole economy sector. peaking of a national competitive ability a state, first and foremost, means competitive ability of national economy in whole, understanding that for that end there is a need for competitive branches, enterprises and products. ith this end in view authorities will offer various methods of business support, change laws and regulations, solve infrastructural and environmental matters etc. et, so far there are no universal formulations regardless of the level these competitive ability problems are solved on. n each specific situation the result can be both positive or negative as the environment where such business competitive advantages are formed is very complex, multifarious and dynamic. he present study intends to examine the idea and factors of business competitive ability, so that from this point on offers a range of tools which will be the most effective in competitive abilities control on the level of companies in the near decade. dea and factors of competitive ability he term "competitive ability" during the last 20 years became rather actual because a great number of new states entered the circle of the world economy so economical competition among countries has strengthened1. evelation of national markets, lowering of trade barriers, globalization and internationalization processes as a whole led to that sort of aggravation of competition, so in actual fact none of a company in the world can be sure in its tomorrow. here are always new threads on the horizon in the form of pioneer substitute products, bankruptcy of suppliers, changes in tax regulations, rates of exchange, countries entering , world crisis etc. he actuality and complexity of the problem can be confirmed by the fact that the questions of competitive ability are considered by economists of different specializations and are set out in various economic disciplines. hus, competitive goods is mainly marketing field of research, which educe essential consumer qualities and terms of goods proposal in the market with a view to ensuring great demand for it.  competitive company – is the problem of strategic management which allocates the targets of business profitability and its benefits, which are necessary for long-term market presence. he competitive branch and national economy are studied by specialists in the field of world economy as here the competition is of international aspect and the function of government regulation in some cases is of fundamental importance. n account of the fact that the idea is multilevel there is no single, recognized definition of the term "competitive ability. herefore prior to relying on one the multiple definitions we need to define which level is the key and backbone one. ithout controversy that is the level of a company. t is just a company and, to be more precise, its actions an decisions realized by its managers and employees make products, compete with other national and foreign companies, together with other companies of the country form a branch and contribute in national . he leading researchers in this field consider market share and profitability as the basic criteria. he positive dynamics of these rates in the longer term mean that the product of a company finds a market, i.e. it is competitive, that the branch wherein the firm is functioning is consolidating on domestic or foreign markets, that it contributes to national economy by way of work positions, taxes, levies and other payments. owever, while distinctly understanding the main objectives of their business and criteria of competitive ability, all too often companies do not know where to find growth sources and do not investigate which factors bring an appreciable effect and which should not be considered at all. side from that when colliding with changes managers often respond to accomplished events just using intuition or the most evident short-run decisions. et it would be more effective to foresee the events which can influence their business, and to develop reaction strategies through acting proactively. n such a manner business may not wait for any changes but to create, but to provoke them pro domo sua. he most complete system of sources of competitive advantage of a company was suggested by an nglish scientist in the field of strategic management . rant. ne of the approaches he proposed lies in separation of inner and external sources. or example the external sources include shift in consumers' tastes, onset of new goods and services on the market, departures of foreign economic policy of the state, changes of free market prices etc. et to the end that the external change frames the calmative advantage, it must render differentiated effect on companies owing to their various resources and responsibilities or strategic positioning. he peculiarities of the internal environment of a company, its resources and business processes define the character and rate of response to external changes, that's why the quality of internal environment also leads to enhancement or loss of competitive ability. ompetitive ability control – environmental factors he strategy generation on changes of external environment first of all requires of external factors classification exercise. ere we can start from the immediate business environment: competitors, consumers, suppliers. he company faces them in day-day work and this fact forces it to keep eyes skinned and control all possible changes. hanges in consumer behavior can be connected with descent of shopping ability (for example amid crisis), with appearance of more cheap and\or qualitative substitutes, competitor's new advertising campaign etc. ach concrete situation needs its own approach. or example, the utch company chick found an effective marketing decision when capturing the apanese market, a manufacturer of shaving blades, at struggle with the world leader illette. he utch made accent on adaptation and took up 62%. hey changed their name involved a apanese actor and effected sales through the apanese distribution system. mericans used the strategy of standardization and took up 10% of the apanese market4. ompetitors' actions can be unrespectable. t that a company should take into account not only the acting players, but also the possibility of apparition of new competitors or substitute goods. ew competitors are inclinable to appear in those branches which demonstrate high profitability over a period of time and where there are no clear-out leaders, oligopolists, monopolists and big companies, which have a liberal market share and the products approved by customers. nd appearance of substitute goods and services in  century of innovations and technologies will cause no surprise in any branch. side from the immediate environment of the company changes in external environment changes can take place in other fields: in economic policy of the nation-state or the consolidated companies' states, in word economy in general, in changes of climate and ecology, in demographic structure and cultural values of the countries where business is conducted etc. he meaning of these non-sectoral factors is not always fast, but thereon the result of their changes does not become less sensitive, and in some cases it is enormous. hile understanding all the threats and possibilities from the external environment, business needs a set of efficient measures to react adequately. t the present time the generally recognized means in competitive struggle and survival on the market is co-operation. t that the co-operation in worldpractice every so often results in business combination and appearance of more stronger player on the market, who can stay more effectively against external press. hus, having realized their inability to tide over on the world and even national market many automakers from entral and astern urope, entered production and technologic alliances with leading manufacturers, and eventually this turned out to be an intermediate form of full inter-corporation integration. t will be remembered that alliances between erman firm  and olish firm "tar", talian "veco" and erbian "astava", rench "enault" and zech "arosa", orean "aewoo" and zech "via" eventually ended with easternuropean automobile firms joining their foreign partners5. t large merger and acquisition across the globe – is, as a rule, reaction of the companies to arising crises and competition stiffening. n the history of the global market & there were six peak periods. conomic crises played a key and generating role in these processes6. et merger and acquisition can be used by business, including small and medium, and with the view of forcing change of external environment, rather than as a reaction to the events which have already happened. f business expansion rates are falling and there are no internal sources of optimization and development, then merger with one of the competitors or his absorption can give the strongest impulse concerning further development of the company. n such a manner a company changes the structure of the market: the number of players is declining, a competitive pattern and market power of individual firms are changing, a character of mutual relations with customers and suppliers
 is modifying. et we should remember that the strategy of merger and acquisition is not perfect. usiness merging can lead to stiffening, complication of processes of development and decision making, excessive diversification and synergetic effect decrease. e should not forget the would-have-been union of automobile giants aimler-enz (ermany) and hrysler (). trategic alliances widely used nowadays can be an alternative to merger and acquisition – a modern form of intercompany cooperation. part from the alternative to excessive integration of business they are also effective when companies need to join efforts not in the whole business sector, but only in one or several directions. part from preserving flexibility and independence, the significant advantage of alliances as against the strategy of merger and acquisition is the possibility of joining efforts for not just two or maximum three companies but for unlimited number of them. owadays alliance networks are formed in a number of areas of the world economy, which fully transform competitive pattern, thus creating categories of oligopoly or duopoly.  prime example of such a situation is the market of international air transportation. tarting with 1997, three alliances of air transporters were formed: tar lliance (1997), ne orld (1999) and ky eam (2000). ach of them includes nearly twenty players. hrough entering an alliance any air company in the world gets access to possibilities of widening customer bases and cost cutting, i.e. it directly leads to growth of competitive ability by means of market-share gain and level of profitability. ompanies, outside alliances, confine their possibilities on the market of international air transportation and have to cash on freight routs and/or inner routes. eing a source of growth owing to extra inputs, cooperation of companies anyhow exert enormous influence on internal environment of firms which joined their efforts. n as it was mentioned above, the quality of inner environment is of paramount importance in providing business competitive ability and only the best configuration of external and inner environment can bring a long-term, positive effect. onsolidated firms or the firms which entered an alliance improve their internal resources, methods and processes of management and organization of business due to the following possibilities: access to a partner's knowledge and technologies, co-developing of innovations, exclusion of redundant functions, operating activity optimization, division of powers etc. his changes in internal environment in addition to external sources give additional competitive advantages which will be considered below. ompetitive ability control – internal environment factors y all means business external environment is the most important base for searching for competitive advantages. et, regardless of all the possibilities of a firm concerning analysis and taking up timely measures while changing the external environment, in some instances all these efforts will be just ineffective. irst of all it concerns the situation when substitute goods and services appear. hus typewriters vanished when personal computers appeared, business correspondence overnight delivery companies showed up on the verge of bankruptcy when faxes and e-mail appeared, film cameras were replaced by digital ones, nowadays smartphones successfully push out classic mobile phones. n all cases as listed one market leaders were replaced by others and the first had to play the secondary roles or leave the market at all as they were not familiar with new technologies. ow we can see okia loses its position and iad pple cones to the front. t is not a surprise for everybody that during the last two years pple in particular became the most expensive brand ($ 100,24 bln. in 2012)7, though just three years ago, in 2009, pple was in the second ten and okia took the 5th place8. cientists-economists have started talking about instability of the external environment and necessity for constructing business competitive ability on the ground of internal resources and competence in the middle 90s of the 20th century. t the heart of this approach lies the fact that a firm – is a special combination of resources and competences, and these resources and competences are the primary determinants of its strategy. eally, what should producers of type writers do when nobody wants to by their product? o put in vast facilities in absorption of computer technologies so that not to lose their clients and market? f taking such a decision a company preserves the external environment, responding to its demands. ut collapse of this decision is evident. t would be far more efficient to give up producing type writers and try, on changing the market and external environment, to produce another product where similar technologies are in demand. or example it could be electric shavers or small domestic electric appliances. n such a situation the risk of collapse will be lower; and it will be far more easier to save business, though in other environment. nfortunately, odak did not use this logic and started producing digital cameras stand ing far behind; and eventually it led to bankruptcy in 2012.
